- [Instructor] Okay. Let's take a look at the basic APIs
on the Java Standard Edition, first.
So, we'll go with the Thread class.
The Thread class is present in the java.lang package,
and the Thread class will help you to start a thread
and manage a thread in the application's run,
so whenever you want to create a thread
for your Java application, you will need to create
an instance of this class in order to start and run
an asynchronous task in your application.
Now, the job of the thread is something that you will define
for your own logic, so the Thread class has got a run method
which will allow you to define that asynchronous job
so that when you start the thread
then that job is going to execute
and then it is going to give you the output.
So, the job is always defined under the run method.
Now, there is some default implementation
in the run method of the Thread class.
We do not want that,
so we'll have to create our own class which extends Thread
and then create an instance of it and start it off
so that it is picked up for execution.
Do not worry about this.
In the next step we are going to look at the demo
for the Thread class.
Let's go ahead with it.
What are going to do as a part of the demo?
The job that you want to actually do for the thread,
is reading a file.
We have a sample text file,
and that you will find it in your exercise folders.
Do not worry about that.
The job that you're going to define for the thread
is that we are going to read this file and print out
all the lines on the console of our application.
Let's get started with the steps.
Use case is the job of the thread, of course, read a file.
The next step is we'll have to create a class
which extends the Thread class,
so let's go back to the IDE and under the runnables folder
I'm going to create a class.
Let's call it ApplicationThread
or whatever you want to call it.
Finish, and let's go ahead and say, extends Thread,
java.lang package.
Next step, we have to define the run method
which will have the file reading code to be executed
as an asynchronous task,
and the file is to be placed at the desired location.
The file is placed under you exercise folders,
let me show you that,
and in the begin folder you have the sample.txt file.
I'm just going to copy the path of this file, quickly.
If you open this file,
I think it's got a huge chunk of data,
chapter one from the Harry Potter book.
So, we have copied the path of the file.
Now, let's come back to the IDE,
and what we're going to do here
is going to define the run method.
You just have to type in the method and say, enter,
and there will be the default implementation.
We want to get rid of it.
We do not want that.
We're going to read that sample.txt file
as a part of the job of the thread.
Let's go ahead and use the try-with-resources statement.
I'm going to take the BufferedReader object
and create an instance of BufferedReader,
and to that, I am going to feed in the FileReader,
and to that, again, I'm going to provide a File object
and mention the path of the file.
I have it copied with me, so let's go ahead and paste it.
And, of course, the name of the file, which is sample.txt .
We are using the try-with-resources statement.
Very easy.
We don't have to explicitly close the resources
once we use this kind of try format.
There's a BufferedReader.
This is a simple java.io API
and I'm doing a chaining of the APIs.
I'm providing FileReader object to BufferedReader,
and FileReader, in turn, will have the File object.
Once that's done, let's take a String variable
which represents every line of the file,
and let's set it to null, initially,
and let's put a small while loop.
What will it do?
It will assign the line, the output from the reader,
so let's say, reader.readLine
so a readLine will be assigned to it
and we'll check whether this is not null.
When it is null, which means
we have reached the end of the file,
so we're ensuring that we have not reached
the end of the file, and we're going to say
System.out.println and let's print out that line.
Okay!
Once done, we see that since that's a java.io operation
it will throw checked exception,
so we'll, quickly, add catch clauses for those.
So, the file reading job is ready with us, very simple.
Let's do one more thing.
Whenever the thread is executed, we know for sure
that the run method is going to be executed,
so we want to also understand when is the thread coming here
and what's the name of the thread.
There is a way to actually print out the name of the thread.
How?
On the Thread class, there is a static method
which is called currentThread
that's the one,
and on that, when you chain another API called getName
so that will give me the name of the thread
which is currently executing this run job,
and I'm going to say, reading the line,
and then append that line variable to it.
I'm doing this because in the testing part of this demo
I'm going to create three threads in the system,
not just one,
so I want to understand which thread came in
and what's the name of the thread
that's trying to read the line from the file.
The job is defined and we're good.
Let's go to the next step.
To test out, we'll have to create an instance
of that user-defined class.
Let's go back to the IDE, and under the tests folder
let's say, Java Class, and let's say TestThreads.
What are we going to do under this?
Grab the main method, first,
and you're going to create an instance of the class
that we created just now.
I'm going to say, thread1, and create an instance of it.
Similarly, I'll just copy this line
and paste it again on line number 18 and 19,
and I'm just going to change the reference names.
Basically, I want three threads
to be created in my system.
That's the point.
Next step will be to start the thread.
So, how do you start a thread?
You just have to take that reference, let's say, thread1
and call the start method on it.
Likewise, I will do the same thing
for the other two threads.
So, what have we done?
We have created our own implementation
which extends the thread class.
We have defined a job for the thread, under the run method,
and now, we're about to test it out.
We have created three threads in the system
and we're starting each one of them.
Please note, we as developers
would never have to invoke that run method.
The run method is only left to the JVM.
We just have to start the threads and run this program.
Once this program gets running, then the JVM
is going to pick up those three threads for execution.
Let's test that class out.
I'm going to say, right-click, and, run file.
Oh yeah!
Do you see the output?
Let's examine it.
What do we see?
A lot of data on the console.
You have Thread-1 reading the line, Chapter One,
Thread-1 reading the line, The Boy Who Lived,
and so on, and so forth,
and then you have Thread-2
which is coming in and reading the line of, Chapter One,
and then Thread-1, zero, one, two, one, zero, one, two.
Do you see what happened?
You have three threads in the system,
all of them, trying to read that file at the same time.
This is exactly what the parallelism behavior is
when you have multiple threads spawned in the system.
That's all, about
how you create a thread using the Thread class.
There are quite a few things that we have to talk about,
but we will see that in the next video.